# CB2500 Quiz


## Week 5

1. Which of the following best describes the metadata in a database?
    - data that is stored in a Web site
    - special data that is unique to a specific user
    - special data that describes the structure of a database
    - programs used to create, process, and administer a database

Answer: C

2. Porter's five competitive forces can be grouped into two types: forces related to ________ and forces related to supply chain bargaining power.
    - pricing
    - labor
    - competition
    - consumers

Answer: C

- Forces related to competition: threats of new entrants, threats of substitutes, and rivalry among existing competitors.
- Forces related to supply chain bargaining power: bargaining power of suppliers and bargaining power of buyers.

3. Which of the following statements describes a scenario in which the bargaining power of a supplier is strong?
    - Competitors have decreased demand for raw materials.
    - The availability of raw materials is limited.
    - The supplier has excess inventory.
    - There are many suppliers providing the same raw materials for comparable prices.

Answer: B

Consider the company A is trying to buy raw materials from a supplier B.

- If the competitors of A have decreased demand for raw materials, then more raw materials will be available for A to buy, which means A can choose a cheaper supplier. So the bargaining power of B is weak.
- If the availability of raw materials is limited, then A has no choice but to buy from B, so the bargaining power of B is strong.
- If the supplier B has excess inventory, he wants to get rid of it, so he will be willing to sell it at a lower price, so the bargaining power of B is weak.
- If there are many suppliers providing the same raw materials for comparable prices, then A can easily switch to another supplier with little cost, so the bargaining power of B is weak.

4. Which of the following competitive strategies does a company follow if it produces a uniquely formulated anti-ageing face cream targeted at women above the age of forty?

- providing the lowest cost across the industry
- providing a better product across the industry
- focusing on lowering the cost within an industry-segment
- focusing on product differentiation within an industry-segment

Answer: D

5. Suppose you are running a business. You are conducting an industry structure analysis using Porter’s five forces model concerning your own business. Under which of the following situations, there is a relatively stronger competitive force against your own company?

- When switching costs are high for customers to switch from rival companies
- When the prices of rival products are relatively high
- When customers are not loyal to their current companies or brands (not yours)
- When it is difficult to find substitutes for your products

Answer: A

Do note that switching costs are not necessarily the same across all companies in the industry.

6. A firm introduces a new range of laptops that concentrate on delivering good graphics performance. Which of the following competitive strategies has the firm adopted if these laptops have relatively low prices?

- focused differentiation
- focused low cost
- industry-wide differentiation
- industry-wide low cost

Answer: B

7. Which of the following statements is true of business processes?

- If a value chain's margin is negative, the value should be decreased.
- Value chain activities differ based on the business processes being used.
- If a value chain's margin is negative, the costs of the value chain should be increased.
- The processes implementing a value chain must create sufficient value to cover their costs.

Answer: D

The margin of a value chain = the value generated by it - the costs of the value chain. If a value chain's margin is negative, the processes implementing it are not creating sufficient value to cover their costs. The value should be increased or the costs should be decreased.

A business process implements a value chain or part of it. While the business process implementation is highly specific, the value chain activities are universal and can be abstracted to a high level.

8. ________software provides capabilities that are common across all organizations and industries.
    - Custom-developed
    - Horizontal-market application
    - Off-the-shelf with alterations
    - Vertical-market application

Answer: B

- 3 types of software: Horizontal-market, vertical-market, and one-of-a-kind.
- 3 sources of software: Off-the-shelf, off-the-shelf with alterations, and custom-developed.

9. The purpose of a database is to ________
    - store lists of data involving multiple themes
    - test and troubleshoot newly installed software
    - design the source code for computer programs
    - describe and build computer architectures

Answer: A

B is the purpose of a test environment, C is the purpose of a programming environment, and D is the purpose of a computer-aided software engineering (CASE) tool.

10. Which of the following is a function of the database management system (DBMS)?
    - implementing lean systems in workstations
    - eliminating bottlenecks in business processes
    - automating workflows in the databases of companies
    - processing a database by inserting or modifying data

Answer: D

## Week 7

1. Which of the following statements is true of business intelligence (BI) systems?
    - Business intelligence systems are primarily used for developing AI systems.
    - The four standard components of business intelligence systems are software, procedures, applications, and programs.
    - The software component of a business intelligence system is called an intelligence database.
    - Business intelligence systems analyze an organization's past performance to make predictions.

Answer: D

B: The four standard components of business intelligence systems are data from the business environment, business intelligence software, business intelligence procedures, and business intelligence applications.

C: The software component of a business intelligence system is called business intelligence software.

2. The use of an organization's operational data as the source data for a business intelligence system is not usually recommended because it ________.
    - is not possible to create reports based on operational data
    - is not possible to perform business intelligence analyses on operational data
    - requires considerable processing and can drastically reduce system performance
    - considers only the external data and not the internal data regarding the organization's

Answer: C

You should use Data Warehouse / Data Mart as the source data for a business intelligence system. The operational data is not suitable for business intelligence because it is not structured for analysis and reporting, and it can slow down the operational systems.

Recall: Layered data architecture: Raw (DBMS) -> Operational Data (ODS) -> Data Warehouse (DW) -> Data Mart (DM)

- ODS is a temporary storage area for operational data.
    - Short-term storage, focusing on the current state of the business.
- DW is a long-term storage area for historical data.
    - Multi-subject, integrated from different sources, time-variant, and non-volatile.
- DM is a subset of DW, focusing on a specific business line or department.
    - Single-subject, summarized, selected source data
    - Relatively short-term storage, focusing on the recent past.

D: Operational data only considers the internal data.

3. A ________ is a data collection, smaller than the data warehouse that addresses the needs of a particular department or functional area of a business.
    - data mart
    - data room
    - data sheet
    - data space

Answer: A

4. Users in a data mart obtain data that pertain to a particular business function from a ________.
    - data room
    - data center
    - datasheet
    - data warehouse

Answer: D

5. ________ is an unsupervised data mining technique in which statistical techniques identify groups of entities that have similar characteristics.
    - Cluster analysis
    - Content indexing
    - Regression analysis
    - Cloud computing

Answer: A

6. Which of the following statements is true of Big Data?
    - Big Data contains only structured data.
    - Big Data has low velocity and is generated slowly.
    - Big Data cannot store graphics, audio, and video files.
    - Big Data refers to data sets that are at least a petabyte in size.

Answer: D

1PB = 1024TB = 1,048,576GB

7. Which of the following is NOT a domain knowledge of project management?
    - Initiate the project
    - Plan the project
    - Close the project
    - Hire new project staff

Answer: D

5 stages of project management: Initiate -> Plan -> Execute -> Monitor and Control -> Close

8. Which of the following feature of banking is NOT related to information management and information systems?
    - Cybersecurity
    - Payment transformation
    - Merger and acquisition
    - Data management

Answer: C

5 features of banking: Growth, Payment transformation, Compliance and risk management, Cybersecurity, Data management

9. BI tools create multidimensional view of data through common operations, including pivot, and ________________.
    - slice and dice
    - filtering
    - ETL
    - catalog

Answer: A

Operations in dimensional modeling:
    - Slice: Fix one dimension and view the data in the other dimensions.
    - Dice: Fix two or more dimensions and view the data in the other dimensions.
    - Pivot: Rotate the data to view it from different perspectives.
    - Drill down: View data at a more detailed level.
    - Roll up: View data at a higher level of aggregation.

10. Which of the following statement is NOT true about market basket analysis?
    - It is a typical business application of association detection.
    - It is to uncover the nature and frequency of the relationships between variables.
    - It is an exploratory BI technique to sort different objects that are similar into groups.
    - It enhances store layout for traditional retailers and targeted marketing for online retailers.

Answer: C

C: Cluster analysis is an exploratory BI technique to sort different objects that are similar into groups.

## Week 9

1. Which of the following is NOT a digital marketing strategy?

    - Retargeting
    - Social Advertising
    - Paid Search Advertising
    - Cost Leadership Advertising

Answer: D

Digital Marketing: Social Media Ads, SEO, Digital Analytics, Qualifications

2. Platforms that enable the creation of social networks, or social relationships among people with common interests, are offered by ________.
   
    - social media providers
    - communities
    - sponsors
    - users

Answer: A

3. Social media (SM) ________ are formed based on mutual interests and transcend familial, geographic, and organizational boundaries.

    - dashboards
    - communities
    - outlets
    - collaborators

Answer: B

4. ________ refer to data and responses to data that are contributed by users and SM sponsors.

    - Custom data
    - Connection data
    - Capital data
    - Content data

Answer: D

Connection data: system generated data that describes relationships. 

Content data: user-generated data.

5. ________ is a dynamic social media process of employing users to participate in product design or product redesign.

    - Social capitalization
    - Collaborative product development
    - Flexible product development
    - Crowdsourcing

Answer: D

6. Which of the following indicates a risk of using social media in human resources?

    - Too much information is available on social media platforms
    - Making errors in forming conclusions about employees through social media
    - Recruiting employees for vacant jobs through social media is way too expensive.
    - Probing employee personal and social life through social media

Answer: B

7. Which of the following is the first step in developing a social media information system (SMIS)?

    - Identify metrics that will indicate whether an organization has achieved its goals.
    - Identify the organization's target audience.
    - Define what the organization wants to achieve with social media.
    - Maximize metrics like conversion rate and bounce rate.

Answer: C

8. Which of the following is an advantage of using Digital Marketing?

    - Performance more measurable
    - Easier to convert
    - More dynamic
    - All of the above

Answer: D

9. Which of the following statements is true of social capital?

    - Being linked into social networks undermines a professional's image and position in an organization.
    - The value of social capital is determined by the number of relationships in a social network.
    - Social capital is an investment in human knowledge and skills for future profit.
    - Social capital can be gained by limiting the number of friends.

Answer: B

Value of social capital = Number of relationships x Relationship strength x Entity resources

C: Human capital is an investment in human knowledge and skills for future profit.

10. A(n) ________ is a software platform that uses social media to facilitate cooperative work of people within an organization.

    - expert system
    - earned value management
    - enterprise social network
    - content management system

Answer: C

## Week 11

1. Which of the following is a human safeguard against security threats?
    - firewall
    - encryption
    - physical security
    - procedure design

Answer: procedure design

2. Which of the following is a pure technical safeguard against security threats?
    - password
    - encryption
    - compliance
    - firewall

Answer: firewall

(password: human safeguard)

3. Thomas is responsible for creating backup copies of information in a system. He also works along with IT personnel to ensure that the backups are valid and that effective recovery procedures exist. Thomas is involved in establishing ________.
    - human safeguards
    - technical safeguards
    - data safeguards

Answer: data safeguards

4. Which of the following is a correct description of business continuity planning?
    - It is also known as disaster restoring process.
    - It involves rigorous planning and commitment of resources to handle immediate disasters.
    - It helps prevent a potential disaster from happening.
    - It is a plan developed by IS auditors.

Answer: It involves rigorous planning and commitment of resources to handle immediate disasters.

5. In a DMZ, the use of the internal firewall is?
    - to protect servers against attack from unknown visitors through the Internet.
    - to protect servers against attack from uses of the local area network.
    - to protect staff computers against attack from unknown visitors through the Internet.
    - to protect Internet users’ computers against attack from staff.

Answer: to protect servers against attack from uses of the local area network.

(Perimeter firewall isolates the DMZ from the Internet. Internal firewall isolates the DMZ from the LAN.)

6. Information silos arise as a result of ________.
    - data integration across several information systems within an organization
    - the sharing of an inter-enterprise information system with several organizations
    - too many users depending on a single enterprise-wide information system
    - data being isolated in systems that are separated across different organizational levels

Answer: data being isolated in systems that are separated across different organizational levels

7. Enterprise resource planning (ERP) helps in ________.
    - consolidating business operations into a single, consistent computing platform
    - managing all the interactions with customers
    - providing layers of software that connect applications together
    - connecting several enterprises within the same industry

Answer: consolidating business operations into a single, consistent computing platform

9. The phenomenon in which the variability in the size and timing of orders increases at each stage up the supply chain is referred to as the ________. 
    - bullwhip effect
    - ripple effect
    - whip effect
    - wave effect

Answer: bullwhip effect

10. Which of the following it NOT a kind of CRM Applications? 
    - Sales Application
    - Relationship Management Applications
    - Customer Support Applications
    - Inventory Control Applications

Answer: Inventory Control Applications
