# CS3402 Labs

In this Lab, SQL\*Plus is used to interact with the Oracle database 11g. Its syntax is slightly different from the SQL syntax used in MySQL.

## Lab 1

### Notes

Common data types in Oracle:

- `NUMBER(p, s)`: Number with precision `p` and scale `s`
    - All numbers are stored in scientific notation
    - `p` = significant digits, `s` = number of digits to the right of the decimal point
    - e.g. `NUMBER(5, 2)` allows `1234.5`, `123.45`, but not `12.345` (which will be rounded to `12.35`)
    - if `NUMBER(p)` is used, `s` is assumed to be 0
    - if `NUMBER` is used, `p` and `s` are assumed to be 38 and 0 respectively.
    - MySQL equivalent: `DECIMAL(p, s)`
- `CHAR(n)`: Fixed-length character string of length `n`
    - `CHAR` is equivalent to `CHAR(1)`
- `DATE`: Date and time (`YYYY-MM-DD hh:mm:ss`)
    - MySQL equivalent: `DATETIME` (In MySQL, `DATE` only stores the date)
- `LONG`: Variable-length character string of up to 4KB
    - MySQL equivalent: `TEXT`
- `RAW`: Raw binary data
    - e.g. can be used to store images
    - MySQL equivalent: `BLOB`

Common commands in SQL\*Plus (excluding the standard DDL and DML commands):
- `DESCRIBE table_name`: Display the structure of a table
    - 3 columns: `Name`, `Null?`, `Type`
- `START file.sql`: Run the SQL commands in a file
- `COMMIT`: Save the changes (insert, update, delete) to the database
    - Table changes (create, alter, drop) are automatically committed

To check the existing tables in the database, use the following command:

```sql
SELECT table_name FROM user_tables;
```

In Oracle, all relations and attributes are case-insensitive and displayed in uppercase by default. For readability, this note will use
- Upper Camel Case for table and attribute names
- UPPER CASE for SQL keywords

However, strings are case-sensitive and should be enclosed in single quotes (`'`). Double quotes are used to enclose identifiers that contain special characters or are case-sensitive.

In Oracle, the not-equal operator is `<>` instead of `!=`.

### Example

Given the following tables:

- `Dept` contains information about departments
    - Attributes: `DeptNo, DName, Loc`
- `SalGrade` groups salary ranges into grades
    - Attributes: `Grade, LoSal, HiSal`
- `Emp` contains information about employees
    - Attributes: `EmpNo, EName, Job, Mgr, HireDate, Sal, Comm, DeptNo`

1. Create tables for the above relations.

```sql
CREATE TABLE Dept (
    DeptNo NUMBER(2) NOT NULL,
    DName VARCHAR2(15),
    Loc VARCHAR2(15),
    PRIMARY KEY (DeptNo)
);
CREATE TABLE SalGrade (
    Grade NUMBER(2) NOT NULL,
    LoSal NUMBER(7, 2),
    HiSal NUMBER(7, 2),
    PRIMARY KEY (Grade)
);
CREATE TABLE Emp (
    EmpNo NUMBER(4) NOT NULL,
    EName VARCHAR2(15),
    Job VARCHAR2(15),
    Mgr NUMBER(4),
    HireDate DATE,
    Sal NUMBER(7, 2),
    Comm NUMBER(7, 2),
    DeptNo NUMBER(2),
    PRIMARY KEY (EmpNo),
    FOREIGN KEY (DeptNo) REFERENCES Dept(DeptNo)
);
```

2. Insert the pre-defined data into the tables.

```sql
START /public/cs3402/Lab1Data.sql
```

3. Alter the table: Change the length of `Dept.Loc` from 15 to 20.

```sql
ALTER TABLE Dept MODIFY (Loc VARCHAR2(20));
```

